# Basic Program Structure
```java
/* Sample Program #1 */ 
public class Hello {
  public static void main (String[] arguments) { 
    System.out.println ("Hello, world!"); // Message + newline
  } 
}
```
This example illustrates a number of things about Java:
### Java programs are collections of definitions
- In this case, there is a definition of a *class* named `Hello` and a *function (or method)* named `main`.
### Definitions are grouped into classes
- Java programs may contain definitions of functions, variables, and a few other things. Every such definition is contained in (is a member of ) some class.
### Dots indicate some kind of containment
- In the example above, `System` is a class and `out` is a variable defined in that class. We can think of that variable, in turn, as referring to an object that has parts (members), one of which is the `println` method. So in general, you can read X.Y as “the Y that is (or whose definition is) contained in X.” We sometimes call ‘.’ the selection operator.
### **The syntax “method-name(expressions)” denotes a function call** (Also called method call or method (or function) invocation.) 
- The program first evaluates the expressions, which are called *actual parameters*. In our example, there is only one (more would be separated by commas), and its value is a *`string`* of characters. 
- the value(s) of any actual parameters are handed off to (*passed*) to the indicated method, which then does whatever it does (unsur- prisingly, `System.out.println` prints the string that you pass it, followed by an end-of-line.)
### Executing a complete program means calling a method named `main`
- Appropriately enough, the method called is often referred to as the main program. You won’t always have to write a main method:
  -  Sometimes, task is to write a component or a package of components for use in one or more other programs. These will consist of a set of classes, not necessarily containing a `main` method.
  -  Sometimes, you are writing something that is intended to be dropped into an existing framework of supporting components.
### Comments are surrounded by /* */ or by // and the end of the line
- Only humans read comments; they have no effect on the program.
### A note on printing
- It isn’t theoretically central to the topic of programming, but the printing or other display of results is obviously rather important. Use `System.out.println`
- Here is an equivalent to the `main` method above:
```java
public static void main (String[] args) { 
  System.out.print ("Hello,"); 
  System.out.print (" world!"); 
  System.out.println ();
}
```
