# Simple Values and Expressions
In Java, these are various kinds of numbers, characters (as from an alphabet), and booleans (true/false) or they may *structured* into compound values. A programming language construct that produces a value is called an `expression`.

## Writing Numbers
Java has both *`integral`* and *`floating-point`* literals (the difference being that the latter can have fractional parts)
```java
class Numerals {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		// A. All print 42
		System.out.println(42);		// Base 10
		System.out.println(052);	// Base 8 (starts with 0)
		System.out.println(0x2a);	// Base 16 (a = 10, b = 12, ..., f = 15)
		
		// B. All print 31.45
		System.out.println(31.45);
		System.out.println(3.145e1);	// en or En means ×10^n
		System.out.println(3145e-2);
		
		// C. Prints 12345678901
		System.out.println(12345678901L);
	}
}
```

## Arithmetic
Java expressions include the familiar algebraic notation, which you can play with easily enough by putting examples into a `main` function:
```java
class Arithmetic {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		// A. Prints 3
		System.out.println ((3 + 7 + 10) * (1000 - 8) / 992 - 17); 
		// B. Prints 2.7166666666666663
		System.out.println (2.0 + 1.0 / 2 + 1.0 / 6 + 1.0 / 24 + 1.0 / 120); 
		// C. Prints 2
		System.out.println (2 + 1/2 + 1/6 + 1/24 + 1/120);
		// D. Prints -3
		System.out.println (1 - 2 - 2);
		// E. Prints 17
		System.out.println (117 % 20);
		// F. Prints Infinity 
		System.out.println (1.0 / 0.0);
		// G. Prints -2147483648 
		System.out.println (2147483647 + 1); 
		// H. Prints NaN
		System.out.println (0.0 / 0.0);
		// I. Halts the program with an exception 
		System.out.println (1/0);
	}
}
```
```
3
2.7166666666666663
2
-3
17
Infinity
-2147483648
NaN
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.ArithmeticException: / by zero
	at Simple_Values_and_Expressions.Arithmetic.main(Arithmetic.java:22)
```
These examples look pretty much like what you might write by hand, and illustrate a few more points:
#### ‘`*`’ denotes multiplication and ’`%`’ denotes remainder.
#### Operators have precedences
  - Example B illustrates grouping and Example A uses parentheses to control grouping. 
#### Operators associate
  - Example D illustrates grouping when the operators have the same precedence
  - subtraction (like most operators) associates left (or groups left) with operators of the same precedence.
#### Integer quantities and floating-point quantities are distinct
  - In Java, a number written without a decimal point (an *integral quantity*) is of a different type from one written with a decimal point (a *floating-point quantity*)
  - Division of two integers throws away the fractional part of the answer to yield an integer
  - division of floating-point numbers behaves more like regular mathematics
  - 1/2 yields 0, while 1.0/2.0 yields 0.5
#### Floating-point arithmetic approximates real arithmetic
  - Floating-point arithmetic is a compromise between computational speed and mathematical truth
  - The results of each operation are computed, correctly rounded, to a certain number of binary digits
#### Arithmetic has limited range
  -  Example G: when an integer value becomes too large, the result “wraps around” to the smallest number.
  -  Example F: print as Infinity and -Infinity to represent numbers that are too large in floating point, which are also used when non-zero floating-point numbers are divided by 0
#### Arithmetic nonsense has predictable effects
  - Example H: a floating-point operation with an undefined value yields a strange special value called NaN (for “Not A Number”). 
  - The analogous integer operation causes an error (what Java calls an exception), since for various reasons, there is no available integer to use as NaN.

## Comparisons and Logical Operations
Comparison operators and logical operators produce the two boolean values true and false
```java
class Compare {
	public static void main(String[] args) {
		// A. All print true 
		System.out.println (true);
		System.out.println(3 < 4);
		System.out.println(3 <= 4);
		System.out.println(3 <= 3);
		System.out.println(4 > 3);
		System.out.println(4 >= 3);
		System.out.println(3 >= 3);
		System.out.println(4 != 3);
		System.out.println(3 == 3);
		
		// B. All print false
		System.out.println (false);
		System.out.println (3 < 3); 
		System.out.println (3 != 3); 
		// C. All print true
		System.out.println (3 < 4 && 4 < 5); 
		System.out.println (3 > 4 || 4 < 5); 
		System.out.println (! (3 < 4 && 4 < 3)); 
		
		// D. All print true
		System.out.println (3 < 4 || 1/0 == 0);
		System.out.println (! (3 > 4 && 1/0 == 0));
	}
}
```
this is all pretty easy to figure out, once you see the transliterations Java uses for common notations:
```
≤ =⇒ <=       ≥ =⇒ >=
= =⇒ ==       = =⇒ !=
and =⇒&&      or =⇒||
not =⇒ !
```

## Strings
In programming-language jargon, a string is a sequence of characters. Write strings in double quotes, using a backslash where needed to indicate special characters, including double quotes and backslashes:
```java
System.out.println ("Simple string.");
System.out.println (""); // An empty string 
System.out.println ("Say \"Hello.\""); // \" is double quote 
System.out.println ("Name:\tJohn"); // \t is tab 
System.out.println ("\\FOO\\BAR");
System.out.println ("One thing\nThe other thing");
```
These statements print (on Unix systems):
```
Simple string.

Say "Hello."
Name:	John
\FOO\BAR
One thing
The other thing
```
The newline character (`\n`) denotes the end-of-line on Unix systems.    
Used `println` rather than `\n`

Characters, the components of strings, have their own literals, which are enclosed in single quotes, with the same back-slashing notation:
```
’A’ ’\t’ ’\’’ ’"’ ’\n’
```

The + operator works on strings, but in that case means “concatenate”, as in 
```java
System.out.println ("The value of" + " 17+25 is " + (17+25) + ".");
```
prints
```
The value of 17+25 is 42.
```

There are quite a few other operations on strings, of which some of the more important are these:
|string method|=>|output|explanation|
|------|---|---|---|
|("19-character string").length ()|=>|19|length of string3|
|("abcd").charAt (3)|=>|’d’|get a character (num- ber from 0)|
|("abcd").equals ("abcd")|=>|true|compare contents|
|("Hello, world!").substring (7, 12)|=>|"world"|substring between start and end positions|
|("Hello, world!").substring (7)|=>|"world!"|substring starting at given position|

## Static Methods: Abstracting Computation
Method (function) definition is the most basic *abstraction mechanism* in a typical programming language.

In Java, there are `static` methods (also called class methods) and `non-static` (or instance) methods.
`Static` methods correspond to plain, ordinary functions, subprograms, or procedures in other programming languages

Basic syntax
```java
A static Tr N (T1 N1, T2 N2,...) { 
	B
}
```
### Tr, T1, etc., -> *types* of values
- Tr -> the type of value returned by the method
- Ti -> the *formal-parameter types*, the types of values that may be passed to the method
- In Java, one must be specific about the types of most quantities.
- a method does stuff, but does not return a value, by using the special “type” `void` for Tr.

### A is one of the keywords `public`, `private`, `protected`, or it is simply missing (the default)
It indicates the access of the method—what other parts of the program may call it.
- `public` → the method may be called from anywhere. 
- `private` → restricts access to the same class.

### N is the name by which the method is known
A method definition always occurs inside a class definition. 
- The full name of a static method N defined in a class C is C.N
- However, the simple name N works within the same class.

### N1, etc., are the *formal parameters*
These are names by which the body of the method (B) can refer to the values passed to it

### { B } is the *body* of the method 
B is a sequence of statements that perform whatever computation the method is supposed to perform
* B may be empty if the method does nothing

### The *header* of the method definition—everything except the body—defines its *signature*
it consists of its name, return type, and formal-parameter types.

### Methods that return values
the statement
```java
return E;
```
Means: “end this call to the method, causing it to yield the value E (an expression).”

### Example
```java
/** The square of X. */
public static double square (double x) {
	return x * x; 
}

```
```java
/** The distance between points (X0, Y0) and (X1, Y1). */
public static double dist (double x0, double y0, double x1, double y1) {
	return Math.sqrt (square (x1 - x0) + square (y1 - y0));
	// NOTE: Math.sqrt is a standard square-root function */ 
}
```
**These two examples also illustrate some documentation conventions.**
- **`/**`**: be used before definitions of things to describe what those things do or are for.
- In the case of methods, the parameter names by writing them in upper case
	- the idea being that this is a way to set them off from the rest of the text of the comment in a way that does not depend on fancy fonts, colors, or the like
- At least one tool (`javadoc`) recognizes these comments and can process them into on-line documentation.
